What is acanthosis nigricans?
Acanthosis nigricans (AN) is a skin condition that causes one or more areas of skin to darken and thicken. Often the skin with AN feels like velvet.

People who get this skin condition sometimes mistakenly believe that a dye or something else they touched has discolored their skin. They try scrubbing away the discoloration. Vigorous scrubbing will not get rid of AN.

Acanthosis nigricans is not contagious. It is not harmful.

Sometimes, it is a warning sign of a health problem that requires medical attention. For this reason, it is important to see a dermatologist if you notice an area of darker, thicker skin.
This skin condition causes areas of skin to darken and thicken as shown here on this 15-year-old girl's hands.This skin condition causes areas of skin to darken and thicken as shown here on this 15-year-old girl's hands.
When to see a dermatologist
If you notice a change to your skin, you should see a dermatologist. Small changes may seem like nothing. Sometimes a small change is an early warning sign. AN can be a sign of pre-diabetes, which increases your risk of getting diabetes. Making lifestyle changes before diabetes develops can prevent diabetes.

AN can also be caused by a medicine you're taking. If this happens, changing medicines might be an option for you.

Other times, these dark patches have no connection to any medical condition. A dermatologist can help you find out what’s causing your discolored skin.

How do dermatologists diagnose acanthosis nigricans?
A dermatologist can diagnose acanthosis nigricans (AN) by looking at your skin.

If your dermatologist diagnoses you with AN, you may need a blood test and other medical tests. These tests can help find out if you have another medical condition. AN is more common in people who have diabetes. Sometimes, AN can be a warning sign of pre-diabetes, thyroid disease, or another condition.

How do dermatologists treat acanthosis nigricans?
Many people see their skin clear when they get treatment for the condition that is causing AN. If you have pre-diabetes, getting that under control often helps to fade the dark patches on your skin. If testing finds a problem with your thyroid or adrenal glands, treating that condition can clear your skin.

You don't have to have a medical condition to have an AN. It's also possible that treating an underlying medical condition like pre-diabetes won't completely clear the dark patches.

It's not necessary to treat an AN. If you want to see clearer skin, a dermatologist can treat you.

Treatment for AN includes the following:

Lighten skin color: Prescription creams, ointments, and gels

Reduce skin thickness: Laser treatments

Decrease odor and discomfort: Antibiotics you apply to the skin and antibacterial soaps

Help clear the skin: Retinoids (may be a cream or pill)

None of these treatments is specifically designed to treat AN. Dermatologists have found, however, that these can help. Sometimes, AN is difficult to treat.

Outcome
If you have AN, it is essential to find out whether another disease is causing it. Finding and treating an undiagnosed disease may clear (or partially clear) your skin.

If a disease is not causing your AN or you do not see the results you want from treating a related disease, a dermatologist can treat your skin.

Dermatologists offer these tips to their patients who have acanthosis nigricans (AN):

Maintain a healthy weight. Obesity is the most common cause of AN in adults and children. Studies have found that people’s skin often clears completely with significant weight loss. You can find out what your healthy weight is by calculating your body mass index.

Before using a bleaching cream, exfoliant, or other skin care product to fade the dark color, ask a dermatologist if you should use it. These products rarely fade AN and can irritate your skin, making AN worse.

Find out if you have a medical condition that is causing AN. Diabetes and other medical conditions can cause AN. Doing things that improve the medical condition often help to clear the skin.

Find out if a medicine you take is causing AN. Some medicines can cause AN. Be sure to tell your dermatologist about all the medicines you take. If medicine is causing your AN, you may be able to switch to another medicine.

If you suddenly see many dark, velvety patches on your skin, immediately make an appointment to see your dermatologist or primary care doctor. This can be a sign of cancer.