If you’re treating your acne but still seeing breakouts, it can be frustrating. Acne has many causes, and treatment looks different for everyone. Fortunately, there are some self-care steps you can take at home to help manage your acne during treatment.
To get the best results from your acne treatment, board-certified dermatologists recommend these tips.

Keep your skin clean. Gently wash your face up to twice daily and after sweating. Choose a gentle, non-abrasive cleanser. Apply it with your fingertips, as scrubbing with washcloths, sponges, and other tools can irritate your skin.

Choose the right skin care. Use gentle skin care products and ones that say “alcohol-free” on the label. Avoid products that can irritate your skin, including astringents, toners, and exfoliants. These products can dry your skin and make acne appear worse.

Shampoo regularly. The oil from your hair can cause acne on your forehead. If you have oily hair, shampoo more often than you do now and keep your hair away from your face.

Stick to your treatment. Trying new acne treatments too often can irritate your skin and cause breakouts. Give your treatment time to work. It may take several weeks to few months before you see a difference.

Keep your hands off. Touching your face throughout the day can cause acne to flare. While it can be tempting to pick, pop, or squeeze your acne, doing so will make the acne take longer to clear and increase your risk for scarring and dark spots called post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Stay out of the sun and tanning beds. Along with increasing your risk for skin cancer, tanning damages your skin and can worsen acne. Some acne medications can also make your skin very sensitive to damaging ultraviolet rays from the sun and tanning beds.

Protect your skin by avoiding tanning — indoors and out — and by seeking shade, wearing sun-protective clothing, and applying a broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher to all skin not covered by clothing when outdoors. Look for a sunscreen that says “non-comedogenic” or “won’t clog pores.” For more effective protection, select clothing with an ultraviolet protection factor (or UPF) number on the label.

Acne takes time to clear. If you keep seeing breakouts after following these tips, partner with a board-certified dermatologist. Dermatologists can treat existing acne, prevent new breakouts from forming, and reduce your chance of developing scars.
Acne can cause your skin to feel oily and greasy, so a moisturizer may be the last thing you’d think of trying. A moisturizer, however, may be just what you need if you’re using one of the following acne treatments:
Benzoyl peroxide

Salicylic acid

Adapalene, tazarotene, or tretinoin

Isotretinoin (prescription treatment for severe acne)

These treatments tend to dry and irritate the skin. Using a moisturizer every day can help your skin tolerate these medications.

A moisturizer can also be helpful any time your skin feels dry, such as during the winter.

When your skin becomes dry, your body makes more oil. The extra oil can clog your pores, which may lead to more breakouts. The right moisturizer can prevent your skin from becoming dry and irritated.

What type of moisturizer should someone with acne-prone skin use?
To prevent a moisturizer from causing breakouts, look for one of these descriptions on the container:

Oil-free

Non-comedogenic

Won’t clog pores

When you see one of these descriptions, it means that the moisturizer is unlikely to cause acne.

When should someone with acne use moisturizer?
You want to apply moisturizer when your skin feels dry. Dermatologists recommend using it every day when your skin feels dry.

Applying it after you wash helps to trap much-needed water in your skin.
When should you see results?
In studies, most patients see less acne between 4 and 8 weeks after beginning to use an acne friendly moisturizer.

All of the patients in these studies were following an acne treatment plan that required them to use acne medication, cleanser, and moisturizer. Dermatologists choose their medication, cleanser, and moisturizer.

Still skeptical?
If using a moisturizer still seems as though it would worsen rather than help clear your acne, you may want to speak with a dermatologist. During an office visit, a dermatologist can tell you what can help clear your acne and create a treatment plan for you.

Your treatment plan may very well include a moisturizer.

