Challenges and real-world solutions for adoption of holistic skincare routine (cleansing, treatment, moisturization, and photoprotection) in acne, rosacea, atopic dermatitis, and sensitive skin: An expert consensus
Chee-Leok Goh 1, Yan Wu 2, Belinda Welsh 3, Ma Flordeliz Abad-Casintahan 4, Chung-Jen Tseng 5, Jaishree Sharad 6, SungKyu Jung 7, Pailin Puangpet 8, Hau Ngai Kingsley Chan 9, Khen Kon 10
Affiliations Expand
PMID: 38853652 DOI: 10.1111/jocd.16396
Abstract
Background: While treatment is a definitive therapeutic component in the management of inflammatory skin conditions, adjunctive skin care comprising of appropriate cleansing, moisturization, and photoprotection are just as important. Cleansing, treatment, moisturization, and photoprotection (CTMP) constitute the four major components of holistic skincare routine for dermatological conditions. However, inadequate patient understanding of the condition, limited resources for physicians, and insufficient time for patient education during busy dermatological consultations are the main obstacles to establishing a holistic skincare routine in the real world.

Aims: This study aimed to identify key challenges in the implementation of a holistic skincare routine, and offer practical guidance to physicians to improve adoption in the management of acne, atopic dermatitis, rosacea, and sensitive skin syndrome.

Methods: An expert panel comprising of nine dermatologists from Australia, China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, India, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, and Thailand convened to develop consensus statements to stimulate real-world adoption of holistic skincare routine in acne, rosacea, atopic dermatitis, and sensitive skin syndrome using the Delphi approach.

Results: Consensus was defined as ≥80% of panel rating statement as ≥8 or median rating of ≥8. The final statements were collated to develop consensus recommendations to encourage adoption of holistic skincare routine.

Conclusion: Promoting patient education on the skin condition, training support staff in patient counseling, and offering physician training opportunities are the key strategies to encourage real-world adoption of CTMP as a holistic skincare routine. The consensus recommendations presented here should be considered in all dermatology patients to accomplish the ultimate goals of improved treatment outcomes and patient satisfaction.

Keywords: acne; atopic dermatitis; holistic skincare; rosacea; sensitive skin.