What is dyshidrotic eczema?
This type of eczema causes tiny, intensely itchy blisters on the hands or feet. It is also called pompholyx.
Dyshidrotic eczema on a woman's palms
While dyshidrotic eczema may look contagious, you cannot catch it from someone.
The blisters of dyshidrotic eczema may last for three to four weeks before clearing. Some people never develop blisters again. Dyshidrotic eczema can also be a lifelong, debilitating disease.

For most people, having dyshidrotic eczema falls somewhere in between having it once and living with a chronic, debilitating condition.

With a dermatologist’s help, many people discover what triggers their blisters. Avoiding what triggers the blisters helps to reduce flare-ups.

Common triggers include personal care products like shampoo or soap. Coming into contact with nickel or cobalt can also lead to blisters. Nickel and cobalt are so common that it can be hard to avoid them. You find these metals in everything from jewelry and cell phones to the foods you eat.

Other common triggers include stress, sweat, and rising temperatures. For some people, dyshidrotic eczema develops every spring or summer and then clears when the temperature starts to fall. Having wet hands for long periods can also trigger dyshidrotic eczema.

If products you work with on your job trigger blisters, a dermatologist can help you protect your skin and prevent new blisters. Cutting oil and cement can be triggers you come in contact with at work.

While a dermatologist can help you reduce flare-ups, there is no cure for dyshidrotic eczema. Sometimes, treatment fails to prevent flare-ups. If you keep getting flare-ups, it’s important to keep working with your dermatologist to try other options.

Recent research has led to new treatments for difficult-to-treat dyshidrotic eczema. One newer option is a medication called dupilumab. This medication belongs to a class of medications called biologics. While dupilumab has only been given to relatively few patients, it has helped them when nothing else worked.
You can only get this type of eczema on your hands, feet, or both. Most people develop it only on their hands.

Whether it appears on your hands, feet, or both, dyshidrotic eczema can cause these signs and symptoms.
tching, burning sensation, prickly feeling, or pain
Before you see anything on your skin, you may have intense itching, burning, or pain on the skin where blisters will appear. Some people say their skin feels prickly.
Tiny, itchy, fluid-filled blisters
The tiny blisters develop in one or more of these areas — palms, the sides of your fingers, or feet. Where you have blisters, your skin may feel intensely itchy or painful.

Some people develop groups of blisters that grow together, forming larger blisters.
Sweat where you have blisters
For some people, the skin with blisters tends to be wet with sweat.
Dry, scaly skin
The blisters clear in about 3 to 4 weeks. As the blisters clear, you’ll see peeling skin where you had blisters, and the skin will feel dry.
Dark spots
People who have a darker skin tone may develop lingering dark spots where they had blisters.
kin infection
Scratching the intensely itchy blisters can lead to a skin infection. This may happen when scratching opens up the blisters and germs get inside. Signs of a skin infection include swelling, redness, and yellow crusting where you have blisters.

If you have signs of an infection, get medical care. Some people develop a potentially serious infection called cellulitis, which develops deep in the skin.
Dry, thick skin that itches all the time
When this happens, the skin can become inflamed, as shown here. Sometimes, the skin between your fingers or toes develops a soft, spongy texture.

The skin may feel scaly and have deep, painful cracks
Nail changes
People who have long-standing dyshidrotic eczema can develop the nail changes shown here. The nails can develop pits and ridges, grow thick, and show discoloration.
How do dermatologists diagnose dyshidrotic eczema?
If your dermatologist suspects that you have dyshidrotic eczema, your dermatologist will:

Look closely at the skin on your hands and feet

Take a bit of fluid from a blister if it looks infected

Ask you questions about your health, what you do for work and hobbies, and when you usually develop blisters

During your appointment, be sure to tell your dermatologist if you have a metal implant in your body or recently:

Noticed that your skin reacts when you wear certain jewelry

Smoked tobacco

Had an injection of vitamin B12

Received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)

Worked with cutting oil or cement

Took a medication, including aspirin or birth control pills

If your dermatologist thinks that the dyshidrotic eczema could be due to an allergy, an allergy test called patch testing may be recommended. During patch testing, small amounts of substances that you may be allergic to are placed on your skin — often the skin on your back.

That’s often all that’s needed to determine whether you have dyshidrotic eczema. If you do, your dermatologist will create a treatment plan tailored to your needs.How do dermatologists treat dyshidrotic eczema?
Your dermatologist will create a treatment plan for you to follow at home. This treatment plan will be tailored to your individual needs and may include the following:

Soaks and cool compresses: Medicated soaks and cool compresses can be very effective for drying blisters. You will apply these two to four times a day for 15 minutes at a time.

Corticosteroid that you apply to your skin: After each soak or cool compress, you’ll likely need to apply a medicated cream or ointment, such as a prescription corticosteroid. This helps to reduce the inflammation and clear the blisters.

Anti-itch medicine: An antihistamine pill or other anti-itch medicine can reduce your discomfort. Anything you can do to reduce scratching is helpful because scratching tends to worsen dyshidrotic eczema. One anti-itch medication that dermatologists frequently include in a treatment plan is pramoxine (pra mox’ een). Available as a cream or lotion, this medication helps to relieve itch and pain.

Moisturizer or a barrier repair cream: Dyshidrotic eczema can make your skin extremely dry. To reduce dryness and decrease flare-ups, your dermatologist will recommend a moisturizer or barrier repair cream.Medication to treat an infection: Skin with dyshidrotic eczema can be very itchy. Scratching often causes an infection. To clear the infection, your dermatologist will first determine what type of infection you have and then prescribe medication to treat it.

Your treatment plan may need adjustments
If you continue to have flare-ups after following the treatment plan prescribed by your dermatologist, tell your dermatologist. It can take time to find the right treatment for dyshidrotic eczema.

In studying dyshidrotic eczema, dermatologists have found that the following can be effective.

Treatment for excessive sweating: If you sweat profusely where you have blisters, treatment that helps to control the sweating can be effective. To treat the excessive sweating, your dermatologist may prescribe:

A prescription antiperspirant that you apply to the area

Injections of botulinum toxin where you have dyshidrotic eczema

Most people think of botulinum toxin as a treatment for wrinkles and frown lines. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has also approved it to treat excessive sweating.

Studies suggest that excessive sweating may trigger dyshidrotic eczema. By reducing the profuse sweating, some people are able to reduce flare-ups. If your dermatologist recommends botulinum toxin, protect your health by seeing a board-certified dermatologist for this treatment.

Stronger medication: People who have dyshidrotic eczema likely have a hypersensitivity. It’s believed that this hypersensitivity causes the blisters. Applying corticosteroids to your skin can help lessen this hypersensitivity, but some patients need stronger (or different) medication.

If you need to treat your skin frequently to prevent flare-ups, your dermatologist may prescribe a medication called pimecrolimus cream or tacrolimus ointment. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved these medications to treat a different type of eczema called atopic dermatitis.

Studies show these medications can effectively treat dyshidrotic eczema. They can be prescribed for a few weeks. If you need long-term treatment, your dermatologist can explain how to use these medications as needed to control flares.

Medication that works throughout your body can be effective when other medication fails to work. Most of these medications help to calm the immune system. Your dermatologist can tell you if one might be an option for you.

Light treatments: This may be an option when stronger treatment is required. If this is an option, you will need to go to your dermatologist’s office or a hospital for treatment. Often a patient needs five treatments a week for three weeks. Do not try to self-treat by spending time outdoors without sun protection or using a tanning bed, as this can damage your skin and increase your risk of getting skin cancer.

Change in diet: Nickel and cobalt are metals found in many foods. If you have a hypersensitivity to either of these metals, a change in diet may help reduce flares-ups.

To reduce the amount of nickel or cobalt in your diet, your dermatologist may recommend a point-based diet. This diet assigns points to foods and beverages. The higher the amount of nickel (or cobalt), the higher the points value for that food or beverage.

To follow this diet plan, your dermatologist will give you information so that you can track your points. You will need to track your points every day. Once you reach a certain number of points, you stop consuming anything that has points.

Patients find it easier to follow a point-based diet than to avoid everything that contains the metal to which they have a sensitivity. Many foods and beverages contain at least small amounts of either nickel or cobalt. Trying to avoid all of them can leave you with few options.

Studies have found that when patients with dyshidrotic eczema who have a metal hypersensitivity follow this point-based diet, they report fewer and less severe flare-ups.

Bed rest, a break from work, or both: If you have painful blisters on your feet, you may need bed rest. Blisters on the hands may require a break from work.

Referral to another doctor: Stress leads to flare-ups for many people with dyshidrotic eczema. If you often feel stressed out or notice that you only get flare-ups when under stress, learning how to manage stress can mean fewer flare-ups.

To help you manage stress effectively, your dermatologist may refer you to a psychologist who can teach you biofeedback therapy or another stress reduction technique.
Moisturizer plays a key role in helping your skin heal
Dermatologists recommend using a fragrance-free cream or ointment. Avoid lotions, which can worsen dyshidrotic eczema because they contain too much water.
If you have dyshidrotic eczema, your skin needs gentle skin care and protection from anything that might irritate it. Here’s what dermatologists recommend does just that:

Remove your rings BEFORE you:

Wash your hands
Apply moisturizer
Go to sleep
Rings can irritate your sensitive skin. Removing your rings as listed above may prevent the irritation.
Wash skin with dyshidrotic eczema gently. When washing, you’ll want to:

Remove rings: Always remove these before washing your hands. If the skin beneath gets wet and stays damp, this could cause a flare-up.
Use lukewarm water: Using lukewarm water every time can help prevent flares.
Wash with mild, fragrance-free cleansers: Skip the antibacterial soaps, and deodorant soaps, which can cause dyshidrotic eczema to flare.
Ask your dermatologist to recommend a hand sanitizer. If you have a hypersensitivity to an ingredient in a hand sanitizer, it can cause a flare-up.

Apply moisturizer (or barrier repair cream) frequently throughout your day. Dyshidrotic eczema leaves you with extremely dry skin. The best times to apply your moisturizer or barrier repair cream are:

After washing
Whenever your skin feels dry
Your dermatologist may recommend using a product called a barrier repair cream that contains dimethicone. This product allows your skin to breathe while creating a barrier that protects your skin from irritation.
Learn to manage stress really well. Some patients find that their skin clears with effective stress reduction and treatment prescribed by their dermatologist.

One stress reduction technique has proven especially effective in small studies. It’s called biofeedback therapy. Some patients have been able to clear their skin — and keep it clear — by practicing biofeedback therapy.

Try to avoid scratching. Anything you can do to reduce scratching is helpful because scratching tends to worsen dyshidrotic eczema.

Take precautions in very dry or hot conditions. Heat, dryness, and sweat are known to trigger dyshidrotic eczema. Try to avoid getting overheated by staying cool. To protect your skin from becoming excessively dry, apply moisturizer frequently.

Avoid what causes an allergic reaction or irritates your skin. If either allergens or irritants are the problem, avoiding them may be necessary to clear your skin — and keep it clear.

If you’re uncertain about what can cause an allergic reaction or irritate your skin, see your dermatologist. Testing can help you know what to avoid.

Protect your hands with gloves. Many things that touch your skin can cause dyshidrotic eczema to flare. Water, detergents, and household cleaners are a few. Even washing dishes or painting could cause dyshidrotic eczema to flare.

To protect your hands, dermatologists recommend that you put gloves on before you get your hands wet and before touching something that could irritate your skin.

You also want to wear the right glove for the job:

Your hands will stay dry: 100% cotton gloves
Wet work: 100% cotton gloves under waterproof gloves. Wearing cotton gloves beneath your waterproof ones helps prevent irritation.
Wear moisture-wicking socks. If you have dyshidrotic eczema on your feet, this will help keep your feet dry.