3. Holzer U, van Royen-Kerkhof A, van der Torre P, KuemmerleDeschner J, Well C, Handgretinger R, et al. Successful autologous stem cell transplantation in two patients withjuvenile dermatomyositis. Scand J Rheumatol 2010;39:88-92. 4. Mandelbrot DA, Santos PW, Burt RK, Oyama Y, Block GA, Ahya SN, et al. Resolution of SLE-related soft-tissue calcificationfollowing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008;23:2679-84. 5. Milanetti F, Abinun M, Voltarelli JC, Burt RK. Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for childhood autoimmune disease. Pediatr Clin North Am 2010;57:239-71. 6. Elhasid R, Rowe JM, Berkowitz D, Ben-Arush M, Bar-Shalom R, Brik R. Disappearance of diffuse calcinosis following autologousstem cell transplantation in a child with autoimmune disease.Bone Marrow Transplant 2004;33:1257-9. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2011.11.967 Reply To the Editor: We thank Dr Velez and coauthors for their comments on our article, ‘‘Calcinosis cutis, part II: Treatment options.’’ Autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) exerts a positive effect on soft-tissue calcification. We agree with the author’ssuggestion that ASCT might be a reasonable choicefor the treatment of extensive lifestyle-limiting andpainful dystrophic calcinosis cutis that does notrespond to traditional therapy. In ASCT, conditioningwith high-dose cyclophosphamide, antithymocyteglobulin, and/or total-body irradiation nullifies the majority of autoreactive effector cells involved in the adaptive and innate immune response, including Band T lymphocytes, monocytes, natural killer cells,and dendritic cells. 1Thus, the immunosuppressive effect of ASCT may be regarded as the key factor inautoimmune diseases. A favorable response of theunderlying disease to ASCT will logically lead to theresolution of all accompanying symptoms, including skin calcification. Nevertheless, one should keep in mind the fact that the transplant-related mortality isapproximately 7%, 1whereas transplant-related toxicity registered 2 years after ASCT was as high as33%. 2Therefore, a careful risk-benefit evaluation must be performed for each patient. What we miss inthe letter of Dr Velez and colleagues is the fact thatnot only dystrophic calcinosis cutis in connective tissue disease, but also calciphylaxis (in most cases a result of end-stage renal disease) may benefit fromASCT. In this context Mandelbrot et al 3described the resolution of extensive calciphylactic lesions in ayoung woman with systemic lupus erythematosus,undergoing hemodialysis for the treatment of lupusnephritis. It is not clear whether the calciphylaxisarose from systemic lupus erythematosus or was secondary to hemodialysis. However, the impressive fact was that the previously painful calciphylacticlesions had healed fully after ASCT treatment and the patient required no further medication for pain relief. In conclusion, ASCT may be regarded as a maximalvariant of immunosuppressive therapy in autoim-mune diseases and even reverses calcinosis cutis. Wesuggest ASCT as a therapy option for patients withsevere therapy-refractory dystrophic calcinosiscaused by autoimmune disease and in patients withextensive calciphylaxis. Nadine Reiter, MD, and Elisabeth Aberer, MDDepartment of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Austria Funding sources: None. Conﬂicts of interest: None declared. Correspondence to: Elisabeth Aberer, MD, Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Auenbrugger Platz 8, A-8036 Graz,Austria E-mail: elisabeth.aberer@medunigraz.at REFERENCES 1. Hugle T, van Laar JM. Stem cell transplantation for rheumatic autoimmune diseases. Arthritis Res Ther 2008;10:217. 2. Szodoray P, Varoczy L, Papp G, Barath S, Nakken B, Szegedi G, et al. Immunological reconstitution after autologous stem celltransplantation in patients with refractory systemic autoim-mune diseases. Scand J Rheumatol 2012;41:110-5. 3. Mandelbrot DA, Santos PW, Burt RK, Oyama Y, Block GA, Ahya SN, et al. Resolution of SLE-related soft-tissue calcificationfollowing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. NephrolDial Transplant 2008;23:2679-84. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2012.02.028 Evidence for fractional laser treatment in the improvement of cutaneous scars To the Editor: We read with great interest the article by Tziotzios and colleagues1describing strategies to reduce cutaneous scarring, published in January 2012. This valuable review article verybriefly touches on fractional laser therapy forscars, and comments that ‘‘there is a limitedevidence base to support use of fractional laser therapy.’’ We have had extensive, favorable clinical experience with nonablative and ablative fractional lasers for scarring ( Fig 1 ) that is strongly supported by several objective, peer-reviewed published stud-ies that were not included in this review. Webelieve the readership would benefit from reviewof these studies and their demonstration of significant efficacy and evidence for improvement of scars. These include a study of 53 patients withJAMACADDERMATOL VOLUME 66, N UMBER 6Letters 1005 atrophic scars treated with a nonablative 1550-nm erbium-doped fractional laser that showed 51% to75% improvement as assessed by independentinvestigators in nearly 90% of the patients. 2In addition, a study at our center of 15 women with atrophic scars treated with 3 ablative fractional carbon-dioxide laser treatments showed improve-ments in skin texture, pigmentation, atrophy, andoverall scar appearance, along with objective im-provement by image analysis showing 38% meanvolume reduction and 35% mean depth reduction. 3 For acne scars, a study of 13 patients with moderateto severe facial acne scars demonstrated a mean 66.8% improvement in the depth of scars by objective 3-dimensional topographic imaging analysisafter 2 to 3 treatments with an ablative fractionalcarbon-dioxide laser. 4Improvement in thermal burn scars was seen in a randomized controlledblinded trial of 17 patients treated with a 1540-nmnonablative fractional laser that showed statisticallysignificant improvement in the evenness and smoothness of scars ( P¼.0015) and reported 8 of 17 patients believed there was moderate or significant improvement. 5 The aforementioned studies are a sampling of published data using new and innovative ap-proaches to scar management that we believe shouldoften be considered the treatment of choice foratrophic scars, acne scars, and some hypertrophic and burn scars. Awareness of these advances will allow physicians to provide or refer their patients forthe optimum improvement of the appearance and physical limitations of scarring. Kavitha K. Reddy, MD, Jeremy A. Brauer, MD, and R o yG .G e r o n e m u s ,M D Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York Funding sources: None. D i s c l o s u r e :D r sG e r o n e m u s ,R e d d y ,a n dB r a u e r each serve as an investigator for Solta Medical. Correspondence to: Kavitha K. Reddy, MD, Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, 317 E 34 St, 11th Floor, New York, NY 10016 E-mail: kreddy@laserskinsurgery.com REFERENCES 1. Tziotzios C, Profyris C, Sterling J. Cutaneous scarring: pathophysiology, molecular mechanisms, and scar reduction therapeutics part II; strateg ies to reduce scar formation after dermatologic procedures. J Am Acad Dermatol 2012;66:13-24. 2. Alster TS, Tanzi EL, Lazarus M. The use of fractional laser photothermolysis for the treatment of atrophic scars. DermatolSurg 2007;33:295-9. 3. Weiss ET, Chapas A, Brightman L, Hunzeker C, Hale EK, Karen JK, et al. Successful treatment of atrophic postoperative and traumatic scarring with carbon dioxide ablative fractional resurfacing: quantitative volumetric scar improvement. ArchDermatol 2010;146:133-40. 4. Chapas AM, Brightman L, Sukal S, Hale E, Daniel D, Bernstein LJ, et al. Successful treatment of acneiform scarring with CO2ablative fractional resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med 2008;40:381-6. 5. Haedersdal M, Moreau KE, Beyer DM, Nymann P, Alsbjorn B. Fractional nonablative 1540 nm laser resurfacing for thermalburn scars: a randomized controlled trial. Lasers Surg Med2009;41:189-95. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2012.01.047 Reply To the Editor: We thank Dr Reddy et al for their comments and for suggesting a wider review of current evidence for the use of fractional lasers in thetreatment of scars. The focus of our CME series wason the molecular pathobiology of hypertrophic andkeloid scarring and on strategies to avoid or treatsuch scarring after dermatologic procedures, as conveyed by the titles of each part. We had therefore not evaluated treatments for atrophic scars nor thoseafter burns or acne. The evidence for fractional laser treatment in keloid or hypertrophic scarring remains limited. Inaddition to the study by Tierney et al, 1quoted in the CME article, other small studies of fractional lasertherapy with short follow-up have suggested some improvement, 2insignificant improvement,3or a reduced risk of hypertrophic scarring.4Some Fig 1. Atrophic surgical scar on the face ( A) that showed clinical improvement including reduction in depth after two treatments ( B) with ablative fractional carbondioxide laser at settings of 40 mJ energy per pulse, 30%coverage, and 0.05 kJ total energy delivered at eachsession.JAMACADDERMATOL JUNE20121006 Letters