What Is My Skin Type?
While there’s no one-size-fits-all approach to achieving radiant-looking skin, understanding your skin type can help guide you toward the right targeted approach. The term “skin type” essentially describes a group of unifying characteristics that represent how your skin tends to look and feel.

Your skin type is largely based on how much sebum (oil) your skin produces. This is largely the result of genetics, but it can also be influenced by several factors—including aging, humidity, stress, and hormones. According to Dr. Ugonabo, “Your skin [type] can change over time. Some people may find that their skin becomes less oily as they age or in certain environments and humidities.” 

 

Ready to find your skin type? Here are the main indicators to keep in mind when determining whether your skin is predominantly oily, dry, normal, combination, or sensitive. 

 

Oily Skin
Oily skin is caused by the overproduction of sebum from the [skin’s] sebaceous glands,” says Dr. Ugonabo. “This can be triggered by stress, humidity, genetics, and even fluctuating hormones.” When the skin produces too much sebum, it can cause your face to appear shiny and feel greasy—especially throughout the T-zone (forehead, nose, and chin). Excess sebum can also clog your pores, which is why oily skin tends to be prone to large pores, blackheads, and other types of acne blemishes. However, there can be an upside to having oily skin. According to the American Academy of Dermatology, people with oily skin may have fewer wrinkles.2
Dry Skin
Dry skin generally produces less sebum than other skin types. Sebum plays a key role in lubricating your skin and helping to protect it from moisture loss. Without sufficient natural oils, your skin may lose moisture too quickly and appear visibly dehydrated, dull, flaky, or even scaly. It often feels tight, with a rough texture and more visible fine lines. Dry skin may also become itchy or irritated. According to Dr. Ugonabo, there are many factors that can trigger dry skin, starting with a compromised skin barrier. “The skin barrier helps retain water in the skin, so when that gets disrupted, water can easily leave—causing the skin to feel dry,” explains Dr. Ugonabo. She also says that certain skincare habits—like using abrasive or drying products or taking long, hot showers—may worsen dryness.
Combination Skin
“Combination skin means that there are some areas of your face that are dry and other areas of your face that are more oily,” says Dr. Ugonabo. She explains that, for those with combo skin, the T-zone (forehead, nose, and chin) is commonly oily, and the cheeks are often drier. “Combination skin can look different in each person,” she adds, explaining that some people may notice shine in areas where they tend to have more oil while others may have red patches in drier spots.

Dr. Ugonabo says that, depending on your skin tone, drier areas may also take on a grayish hue (sometimes referred to as ashy skin). The combination skin type may be more likely to vary during different seasons of the year or due to various factors, such as stress or hormone fluctuation
Normal Skin
According to Dr. Ugonabo, “Normal skin just means that your skin feels hydrated and comfortable, but not oily or dry.” She explains that, unlike combination skin, people with normal skin don’t have patches that are oily and patches that are dry. “They just have an overall hydrated and comfortable look,” she adds. Normal skin types are generally not prone to any specific skin concerns, like acne breakouts, redness, or shine. People with normal skin often have a smooth skin texture with less noticeable pores and may be less prone to sensitivity. 

 

Sensitive Skin
Sensitive skin is the only skin type that isn’t determined by how much oil your skin produces. Instead, sensitive skin describes skin that is more reactive than other skin types. Sensitive skin may be more vulnerable to external irritants and easily triggered by certain ingredients (like fragrance) as well as environmental factors (like pollution). People with sensitive skin may notice that their skin looks red and stings, burns, or feels irritated after applying skincare products. Although it’s usually classified as its own skin type, it’s possible for any of the other skin types to experience sensitivity. The exact cause of sensitive skin is still unknown but recent research suggests that it may be associated with a compromised skin barrier.3

 

How Can I Identify My Skin Type at Home?
There are multiple tests you can perform at home to help you determine your skin type. Here are two popular methods you can use to discover what type of skin you have.

 

The “watch and wait” method
The “watch and wait method” (sometimes known as the “bare-faced method”) allows you to understand your skin type by observing how your skin behaves after cleansing. To start, wash your face with a gentle cleanser, then pat it dry using a soft towel. Next, wait for 30 minutes and take a close look at your skin in the mirror. If your skin appears shiny all over, you likely have oily skin. Flaky, rough, or tight-feeling skin signals that you have dry skin. If you notice shine only around your T-zone, you probably have combination skin. And, lastly, if your skin feels hydrated and doesn’t appear dry or oily anywhere, you likely have normal skin.

 

The blotting sheet method
When pressed to the skin, blotting sheets absorb oil—and you can use them to help identify your skin type. To try this simple method, wash your face, pat it dry, and wait for 30 minutes. Then, press blotting sheets to various areas of your face, and hold the sheets up to the light to see the oil markings as you go. If the sheets soaked up an abundance of oil from all areas of the face, you probably have oily skin. If they absorbed little to no oil, then you likely have dry skin. Sheets that pick up oil only from your T-zone signify combination skin. And, if you see minimal oil from every area of your face, you most likely have normal skin.

 

How To Care for Your Skin Type
Tips for oily skin
“You can’t technically get rid of oily skin,” explains Dr. Ugonabo. “However, with a great skincare routine, you can help keep [excess] oil at bay and help keep your skin looking less shiny and greasy during the day.” So, what does she recommend when caring for oily skin? “People with oily skin want to avoid products that are oil-based. Specifically, you want to look for products that are oil-free, whether it’s a cleanser or a moisturizer.” One excellent cleanser to try for oily skin is CeraVe Foaming Facial Cleanser, a foaming gel wash that deeply cleanses, removes excess oil, and refreshes your skin without disrupting the skin barrier.

Additionally, just because oily skin produces more natural oils, it doesn’t mean that this skin type requires any less moisture. “It’s important to know that people with oily skin still need [to use] a moisturizer,” says. Dr. Ugonabo. She recommends choosing non-comedogenic, oil-free moisturizers after cleansing (such as CeraVe Oil Control Moisturizing Gel-Cream). 

 

Browse CeraVe Products for Oily Skin

 

Tips for dry skin
For those with dry skin, Dr. Ugonabo recommends starting your skincare routine with a gentle, fragrance-free cleanser (like CeraVe Hydrating Foaming Oil Cleanser). “Ingredients to look for include ceramides, a component of your skin’s natural moisture barrier, and hyaluronic acid, which helps retain moisture in the skin,” she says. Glycerin is another great ingredient that Dr. Ugonabo recommends for dry skin.

“With dry skin, you can still cleanse twice a day, but it’s important to moisturize immediately afterward to help your skin restore the moisture that cleansing may have removed,” explains Dr. Ugonabo. “You also want to look for moisturizers that are thicker in consistency. So, for example, creams rather than lotions.” She says that richer formulas (such as CeraVe Moisturizing Cream) tend to be more moisturizing for dry skin types and may help the skin retain more water.

Browse CeraVe Products for Dry Skin

 

Tips for combination skin
Effective cleansing and moisturizing are essential when caring for skin that's oily in some places and dry in others. When applying moisturizer, Dr. Ugonabo generally recommends focusing on areas that are drier. “For example, if it’s your cheeks that are dry, you would apply more moisturizer to those areas than the other parts of your face,” she says.

Another approach to moisturizing combination skin is to use two different facial moisturizers. “Specifically, on the drier parts of your face, you want to use thicker moisturizers [that are] more cream-based,” says Dr. Ugonabo. “Then, on the oilier parts of your face, you can use a gel-based moisturizer.” For example, in the evening, you could use CeraVe Ultra-Light Moisturizing Gel on your T-zone area and CeraVe Skin Renewing Night Cream on your cheeks and neck. She also recommends using blotting papers around the T-zone to help absorb excess oil To learn more about building a routine for combination skin, check out our skincare routine for combination skin.

 

Browse CeraVe Products for Combination Skin


Tips for normal skin
Despite the fact that normal skin usually doesn’t have any specific issues or concerns, it still requires proper skincare to look and feel its best. The ideal normal skin routine helps maintain your skin’s hydration by locking in moisture and supporting your skin’s protective barrier. “Those with normal skin still need to moisturize, and so dermatologists will typically recommend formulas with moisturizing ingredients such as ceramides and hyaluronic acid,” says Dr. Ugonabo. She explains that the right moisturizer for normal skin should help add hydration back into the skin after cleansing. One ideal moisturizer pairing for normal skin is CeraVe AM Facial Moisturizing Lotion SPF 50 and CeraVe PM Facial Moisturizing Lotion.

“Regardless of your skin type—whether it’s dry, oily, combination, or normal—you can [still] be prone to acne,” says adds. Dr. Ugonabo recommends that people with normal skin still choose products that are non-comedogenic to help reduce the chances of experiencing a breakout.

 

Browse CeraVe Products for Normal Skin

 

Tips for sensitive skin
If you have sensitive skin, it’s best to work with a board-certified dermatologist to determine what triggers your sensitivity. Your dermatologist can help you build a skincare routine for your sensitive skin’s needs and recommend cleansers, moisturizers, sunscreens, and other products that are gentle on the skin. They can also help you alter your environment to reduce your exposure to triggering agents.

People with sensitive skin should generally avoid harsh, drying ingredients and formulas with fragrance (a known skin irritant). CeraVe recommends a gentle routine for sensitive skin that includes products such as our Hydrating Facial Cleanser, Hydrating Hyaluronic Acid Serum, and Hydrating Mineral Sunscreen SPF 30 Face Sheer Tint.

 