Your skin care routine doesn’t need to be overly involved — or expensive
You want to take good care of your skin. But stepping into a beauty store, or even the skin care aisle of the drug store, can feel instantly overwhelming.

With so many products claiming to make your skin look ahh-mazing, it’s hard to know which ones you really need.

“A skin care routine should really be tailored to each person’s skin type and goals,” says dermatologist Shilpi Khetarpal, MD. “For younger people, skin care routines should help protect the skin from sun and contaminants in the air. For those with acne-prone skin, it’s about managing breakouts. For people with more mature skin, the focus might be on preventing fine lines, discoloration and other signs of aging.”

A good routine can help your skin look and feel great — but it doesn’t have to be overly complicated. Here are the basic steps that Dr. Khetarpal recommends.

Morning skin care routine
“Typically, I think of our morning routine as protecting our skin, and our nighttime routine as repairing it,” Dr. Khetarpal says.

She recommends starting with these three products and steps in the a.m.

Step 1: Cleanser
What you put on your face in the morning can serve several purposes. First and foremost, a splash of water on your face will wake you right up. But what about after that?

Even if your face feels clean in the morning, Dr. Khetarpal advises washing it with a gentle, nonmedicated cleanser, which will clean your skin without leaving it too dry. Use lukewarm water and gently massage the face wash on your face. Pat your skin dry with a towel (don’t rub!). If you’re more prone to dry skin, look for cleansers with hyaluronic acid to help keep your skin hydrated.

Step 2: Antioxidant cream or serum
While this isn’t a necessary step, an antioxidant serum or cream can also benefit your skin in the mornings. These are products that contain facial acids like vitamin C, E or ferulic acid.

Specifically, vitamin C products can protect your skin from molecules in our environment — aka free radicals — that can damage your skin. It can also improve your skin’s collagen production. A vitamin E serum in the mornings can help your skin retain moisture and protect your skin from damage.

Ferulic acid also has antioxidant properties, but you’ll usually find this ingredient blended with vitamin C or vitamin E. If you want the highest concentration, it’s best to use them in serum form, but you can also find them in face creams.

Step 3: Sunscreen
Protecting your skin from ultraviolet (UV) rays is an important part of a morning skin care routine. Use a product with at least SPF 30 to shield your skin from ultraviolet radiation. Some moisturizers, concealers and foundations contain SPF, but it's still best to apply a separate facial sunscreen. “I recommend a sunscreen with either iron oxide, zinc oxide or titanium dioxide,” Dr. Khetarpal says. 

Nighttime skin care routine
It’s a good idea to “wash away the day” from your face in the evening as well. At night, your focus should be on cleansing and repairing your skin. Here’s how you can do that.

Step 1: Makeup remover
First, be sure to remove any makeup if you have it on. “Most cleansers aren’t going to take off all of our makeup, so it’s not a bad idea to do a makeup remover first,” Dr. Khetarpal recommends. Several products can remove makeup, including wipes, micellar water or balms. If you use makeup-removing wipes, opt for the fragrance-free kind to avoid any skin irritation.

Step 2: Cleanser
Next, wash your face using a gentle cleanser or one suited to your skin type. Acne-prone skin may benefit from a face wash that contains salicylic acid or benzoyl peroxide, Dr. Khetarpal points out. People in their 30s or 40s might opt for a cleanser with alpha hydroxy acid, like glycolic acid, to brighten their skin reduce pigmentation. 

If you have skin that’s on the oily side, you may also benefit from double cleansing in the evening, where you start off with an oil-based cleanser and follow with a water-based one.

Step 3: Toner
This is an optional step that helps get any additional gunk out of your pores after cleansing your face. If you don’t use a makeup remover before washing your face, wiping it with a toner afterward can help pick up any additional dirt and makeup that your cleanser didn’t get.

Dr. Khetarpal recommends this option for people with more oily skin. “Some toners are alcohol-based and can strip the natural oils from your skin. This can lead to dryness or irritation,” she notes.

Step 4: Moisturizer
As a final step in your nightly routine, apply a vitamin A-based cream to help build new collagen and rehydrate your skin overnight. Dr. Khetarpal recommends one that contains tretinoin, retinol, bakuchiol or adapalene. If it dries out your skin at all, you can add a moisturizer that contains ceramide or hyaluronic acid on top.

Choosing the right products and ingredients
When it comes to skin care, don’t judge a product’s quality by its price tag — or by the claims made on its label. Dr. Khetarpal recommends investing in products that contain ingredients that are backed by scientific studies, like the ones she’s mentioned.

“The products that are really going to help your skin aren’t always going to be the most expensive ones,” she reiterates. “Just because something is very expensive, that doesn’t mean it is going to help your skin. And just because something is natural doesn’t mean you can’t be allergic to it.”

Because many beauty products contain preservatives, chemicals or fragrances that could irritate or dry out your skin, it’s a good idea to introduce new products one at a time.

If you have sensitive skin, Dr. Khetarpal advises using a pea-sized dot of product behind your ear, along your jawline, and waiting a day or two to make sure your skin doesn’t react before applying it to your whole face.

It’s not just about what you put on your face
It’s important to remember that no product on any shelf is going to give you fabulous, glowing skin if you don’t take care of it from the inside out. Like the rest of your body, your skin won’t be at its best if you aren’t getting enough sleep (yes, “beauty sleep” is a real thing), managing your stress and eating a healthy, well-rounded diet.

The bottom line: Skin care made simple
Your dermatologist may recommend prescription medications or topical creams if you have a specific condition such as cystic acne or dry skin. So, be sure to talk to a healthcare provider about any unusual skin-related symptoms you may be having.

But overall, you don’t need to have a degree in chemistry or a triple-digit bank account to figure out what skin care routine is best for you. You can have a simple, easy-to-remember process and products that help keep your skin clean, moisturized and protected from the sun.