anecdotal reports of the production of hypertrophic scarring after fractional carbon-dioxide laser therapy must also be taken into account when assessing thetreatments. 5,6In contrast, there is ample evidence for products of translational research, testament to theimportance of this approach to therapeutics. As wenoted, lack of evidence does not imply lack ofefficacy but does suggest that more well-designedstudies on the clinical efficacy of commonly used antiscarring strategies are essential. Christos Tziotzios, MA, MB, BChir (Cantab), MRCP (UK), aC h r i s t o sP r o f y r i s ,M A ,B M ,B C h( O x o n ) , MRCS (Eng),band Jane Sterling, MA, MB, BChir, PhD (Cantab), FRCPc Addenbrooke’s Hospitalaand Department of Dermatology, University of Cambridge,cCambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust; and Department of Plastic and Burns, Chelsea andWestminster Hospital, London, bUnited Kingdom Funding sources: None. Conﬂicts of interest: None declared. Correspondence to: Christos Tziotzios, MA, MB, BChir (Cantab), MRCP (UK), Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals NHSFoundation Trust, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, Cambridge, United Kingdom E-mail: ct287@cantab.net REFERENCES 1. Tierney E, Mahmood BH, Srivastava D, Ozog D, Kouba DJ. Treatment of surgical scars with nonablative fractional laserversus pulsed dye laser: a randomized controlled trial. DermatolSurg 2009;35:1172-80. 2. Niwa ABM, Mello APF, Torezan LA, Osorio N. Fractional photothermolysis for the treatment of hypertrophic scars: clinicalexperience of eight cases. Dermatol Surg 2009;35:773-7. 3. Babilas P, Schremi S, Eames T, Hohenleutner U, Landthaler M, Hohenleutner S. Experience with non-ablative fractional photothermolysis with a dual-mode laser device (1,440/1,320 nm): no considerable clinical effect on hypertrophic/acne scars andfacial wrinkles. Lasers Med Surg 2011;26:473-9. 4. Choe JH, Park YL, Kim BJ, Kim MN, Rho NK, Park BS, et al. Prevention of thyroidectomy scar using a new 1,550-nmfractional erbium-glass laser. Dermatol Surg 2009;35:1199-205. 5. Avram MM, Tope WD, Yu T, Szachowicz E, Nelson JS. Hypertrophic scarring of the neck following ablative fractional carbondioxide laser resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med 2009;41:185-8. 6. Lee SJ, Kim JH, Lee SE, Chung WS, Oh SH, Cho SB. Hypertrophic scarring after burn treatment with a 10,600-nm carbon dioxide fractional laser. Dermatol Surg 2011;38:1168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2012.02.026 RESEARCH LETTERS Stability of sunscreens and sunblocks following exposure to extreme temperatures To the Editor: Sunscreens and sunblocks are significant means of protection from the cutaneous damages imparted by ultraviolet radiation (UVR). Chemical sunscreens, as opposed to physical sunblocks, typi-cally consist of a combination of lipophilic organiccompounds in order to absorb the broad UVR spec-trum. These sunscreen oils are incorporated into thelipophilic phase of oil-in-water or water-in-oil emul-sions to achieve an efficacious and esthetically ac-ceptable product. 1Sunscreens are frequently exposed to temperature extremes. For example, depending onthe ambient temperature, the interior temperature ofan automobile can range from e38Ct o8 9 8C. 2,3These extreme temperature exposures may have a profoundeffect on the chemical stability of sunscreens andinduce irreversible emulsion instability via alterationof droplet-droplet interactions and phase transitions. 4 These physical and chemical changes could reduce the ability of sunscreens to protect the skin by filtering and/or absorbing UVR.A review of the literature failed to identify any studies examining the thermal stability of sun-screens. Hence a pilot study was conducted to observe the alterations in emulsion properties and physical characteristics of 9 commercially availablesunscreen and sunblock creams and lotions after an8-hour exposure to a range of temperatures includ-ing/C0208C, 4 8C, 21 8C, 30 8C, and 60 8C(Table I ). Aerosols were not included in the study due to theirrapid evaporation once expelled from their con-tainers. The control group consisted of the vials placed at 21 8C (room temperature). Each product, which had a sun protection factor between 40 and 70 was placed in a sealed glass vial with photographstaken at room temperature before and after the8-hour scheduled exposures. One product (9) revealed minimal phase separation following an 8-hour exposure at e208C and 4 8C but exhibited deﬁnite phase separation following its exposure at 30 8C and 60 8C(Fig 1 ). Likewise, a second product (4) revealed a phase separation following its 8-hour exposure at 60 8C (see Fig 1 ).JAMACADDERMATOL VOLUME 66, N UMBER 6Letters 1007 The separated phases of samples 4 and 9 failed to homogenize after 30 seconds of shaking. Further, samples 3, 4, and 5 became slightly discolored following their 8-hour exposures at 60 8C. The physical appearances of the other products remainedunchanged. This preliminary study demonstrates that extreme temperatures can result in irreversible alterations inthe physical characteristics of sunscreens or combi-nations of sunscreens and sunblocks, an effect that was more pronounced following exposures at warmer temperatures. Such exposures are not un-common as sunscreens are often left in vehicles. Themacroscopic changes observed in these productsmay translate into decreased sun-protective efﬁcacyas a consequence of disruption of their active chem-ical constituents, an effect that may be observed inlotions and creams. These latter effects may occur even without observable physical changes, results that can be elucidated in future biochemical studiesthat examine the thermal stability of sunscreenchemical constituents. Nonetheless, education sur-rounding prevention of UVR-induced damage, mostimportantly cutaneous malignancies, should not onlystress regular application of sunscreens, but shouldalso emphasize proper storage of these products to ensure the integrity of their sun-protective potential. Gordon W. Jung, MD, Patricia T. Ting, MSc, MD, and Thomas G. Salopek, MD, FRCPC Division of Dermatology and Cutaneous Sciences, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, E d m o n t o n ,A l b e r t a ,C a n a d a P r e s e n t e dp r e v i o u s l ya tt h e2 2 n dW o r l dC o n g r e s so f Dermatology, Seoul, Korea, May 2011. Funding sources: None.Table I. Effect of temperature on study sunscreens and sunblocks Product study numberAlterations following 8 hours of extreme temperature exposures Sunscreen, sunblock, or combination *Product vehicle /C0208C4 8C218C (control) 30 8C6 08C 1 Combination Lotion ee e e e 2 Combination Lotion ee e e e 3 Sunscreen only Lotion ee e e Discoloration 4 Sunscreen only Lotion ee e e DPC; discoloration 5 Combination Lotion ee e e Discoloration 6 Sunscreen only Lotion ee e e e 7 Sunblock only Cream ee e e e 8 Sunblock only Lotion ee e e e 9 Combination Lotion MPC MPC e DPC DPC e, No change; DPC, definite phase change; MPC, minimal phase change. *Combination included both sunscreen and sunblock components. Fig 1. Effects of heat exposure. Sample 4 at room temperature ( A) and after exposure to 60 8C for 8 hrs ( B). Sample 9 at room temperature ( C) and after exposure to 608C for 8 hours ( D).JAMACADDERMATOL JUNE20121008 Letters Conﬂict of interest: None declared. Correspondence to: Thomas G. Salopek, MD, FRCPC, Division of Dermatology and Cutaneous Sciences, Department of Medicine, University Dermatology Centre, 2-125 Clinical Sciences Building, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2G3, Canada E-mail: tsalopek@ualberta.ca REFERENCES 1. Levy SB. Sunscreens. In: Wolverton SE, editor. Comprehensive dermatologic drug therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2007. pp. 703-17. 2. Marty W, Sigrist T, Wyler D. Temperature variations in automobiles in various weather conditions. An experimental contribu-tion to the determination of time of death. Am J Forensic MedPathol 2001;22:215-9. 3. Grundstein A, Meentemeyer V, Dowd J. Maximum vehicle cabin temperatures under different meteorological conditions. Int JBiometeorol 2009;53:255-61. 4. Weiss J. Emulsion Stability Determination, Section D3.4. In: Wrolstad RE, Acree TE, An H, Decker EA, Penner MH, ReidDS, et al, editors. Current protocols in food analyticalchemistry. Mississauga: John Wiley & Sons (Canada); 2002.pp. D3.4.1-D3.4.17. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2011.10.010 The infra-auricular ﬁssure: A bedside marker of disease severity in patients with atopicdermatitis To the Editor: Monitoring the severity of atopic dermatitis (AD) is crucial to disease management. Tools exist to assess disease severity for experimentalstudies; these tools are not practical in a high-volumeclinical setting. 1Thus, a simple bedside marker of AD severity would be a useful addition to the armamen-tarium of AD management. The presence of an infra-auricular ﬁssure in patients with AD has been previously noted. 2-5 Although these studies have examined the preva-lence of the infra-auricular fissure, its definitionvaries substantially between studies. In addition, toour knowledge, no previous study has correlated theseverity of the fissure with AD severity. Therefore,the goal of the current study was to determine if theseverity of the infra-auricular fissure can be used as a bedside marker for AD and associated itch severity. Further, we wanted to determine whether thismarker correlates with other validated tools ofeczema severity such as the Eczema Area andSeverity Index (EASI) and Investigator’s GlobalAssessment (IGA). Patients presented to the Wake Forest Dermatology Clinic, Winston-Salem, NC, between July 2010 and January 2011 with a clinical diagnosis of AD as deﬁned by Haniﬁn and Rajka. 6Patients withdemonstrated infra-auricular fissures and no additional dermatologic conditions other than AD were included as subjects. Infra-auricular fissure assess-ment was based on fissure depth, erythema, scaling,and oozing/crusting (Fig 1 ). Infra-auricular scoring was performed by two physician researchers notdirectly involved in the care of the patient; assess-ment of EASI and IGA scores was used to measureAD severity. Patients 7 years of age or older were asked to rate on a numerical visual analog scale of 1 to 10 theiraverage itch intensity during the last week. Patientsyounger than 7 years had itch intensity assessed byasking parents to rate their child’s itch. A subset ofpatients was followed up in clinic between 1 to 2months after the initial visit. At this visit, EASI score,IGA score, itch intensity, and infra-auricular fissure score were reassessed. All analyses were performed using Spearman correlation to analyze the relationship of infraauricular ﬁssure score with EASI score, IGA score,and itch intensity. Wilcoxon signed rank test evalu-ated differences between ﬁrst and second visitparameters. Statistical signiﬁcance was set at Pless than .05. In all, 81 patients (48 male, 33 female) with a mean age of 7.5 (range 1-61) years were enrolled. Patientswere Caucasian (44), African American (20),Hispanic (9), and Asian (8). The percentages ofpatients with an infra-auricular ﬁssure score of 1, 2,and 3 were 58%, 27%, and 15%, respectively. A high correlation coefﬁcient was found between infra-auricular ﬁssure score and EASI score (0.6, P\ .001) during the first patient visit (Fig 2 ). Similarly, of the 29 patients who returned for a follow-up visitafter 1 to 2 months, the correlation coefficientbetween infra-auricular fissure score and EASI andIGA scores were 0.4 (P \.05) and 0.5 (P \.01), respectively. No correlation was found between visual analog scale scores of itch intensity and infra-auricular ﬁssure score during the initial visit. However, of the 29 patients who returned, the correlation coef-ﬁcient between infra-auricular ﬁssure score andvisual analog scale scores for itch intensity was 0.6(P\.01). These patients experienced a mean improvement in fissure score (1.6-0.8) associatedwith a significant reduction in EASI score, IGAscore, and itch intensity. This study demonstrates that the infra-auricular ﬁssure can be used as a bedside tool to assess theseverity of AD. Speciﬁcally, the results of the studyimply a direct correlation between the appearance ofthe infra-auricular ﬁssure with AD severity. Thistool’s utility is underscored by its presence amongJAMACADDERMATOL VOLUME 66, N UMBER 6Letters 1009