A dermatologist is a medical doctor who specializes in conditions that affect the skin, hair, and nails. Whether it’s rashes, wrinkles, psoriasis, or melanoma, no one understands your skin, hair, and nails better than a board-certified dermatologist.
The skin is an incredible organ. It is your first line of defense against disease, protects your other organs, warms you up and cools you down, and sends messages about how healthy you are inside. Dermatologists are expert medical doctors and skin surgeons with the unique skills and experience to offer the best care for the organ that cares for you.

What does a dermatologist do?
A board-certified dermatologist has extensive training, which allows them to accurately diagnose and properly treat more than 3,000 diseases of the skin, hair, and nails as well as cosmetic concerns.

If you were to watch a dermatologist at work on any given day, you might see them:

Treat a baby’s prominent birthmark that threatens the child’s eyesight.

Remove a mother’s deadly melanoma at its earliest, most treatable stage.

Offer relief for a student whose chronic eczema makes sleep nearly impossible.

Diagnose the life-threatening liver condition causing a grandfather’s unbearable itching.

Treat the hair loss of a young woman, helping her gain the confidence to search for a job.

Your dermatologist knows the difference between something small and something major.

Dermatologists also understand that a skin condition can have a serious impact on your health and well-being. Sometimes, a skin condition is a sign of a serious underlying health issue, and your dermatologist may be the first one to notice it. For example, signs of diabetes and heart disease can show up on the skin.

Your dermatologist knows that a skin condition doesn’t have to be life-threatening to reduce a person’s quality of life. A skin condition can cause sleep loss, poor self-image, serious depression, or lost productivity. Eczema (aka atopic dermatitis), hair loss that causes scarring, and psoriasis are some conditions that can do this.
Why partner with a board-certified dermatologist?
Everyone’s skin is unique. No one understands your skin better than a board-certified dermatologist. When you partner with this expert, you get the best care.

A board-certified dermatologist knows how to accurately diagnose and properly treat a wide variety of skin conditions from deadly skin cancers to warts.

They have expertise in caring for conditions ranging from long-term diseases caused by problems with your immune system and allergic reactions to hair loss and infections caused by bacteria or viruses.

Dermatologists understand the interaction between the skin and the rest of the body. What seems like a simple rash might be a sign of an underlying disease. For example, that itchy rash could be hives, scabies, or a skin reaction called contact dermatitis. Each of these diseases requires different treatment.

When you’re under a dermatologist’s care for a skin condition, your dermatologist can monitor you for other medical conditions. For example, someone living with psoriasis has a greater risk of developing high blood pressure, unhealthy cholesterol levels, and diabetes, so a dermatologist will watch for signs of these conditions.

Dermatologists also help patients who want help with cosmetic concerns like:

Wrinkles

Sagging skin

Scarring caused by acne or surgery to remove a skin cancer

Giving the skin to a healthier appearance after someone develops AIDS

People trust their cosmetic concerns to board-certified dermatologists because dermatologists know the skin as well as the anatomy of the nerves and muscles that lie beneath the skin. This expertise helps them choose the best cosmetic approach for each patient, avoid issues with cosmetic treatments, and correct an issue quickly if it happens.

Another benefit of seeing a dermatologist for a cosmetic concern is to make sure you have a cosmetic concern. For example, what looks like an age spot could be a skin cancer. Removing a skin cancer like you would an age spot can allow the skin cancer to grow and possibly spread.